[
  {"question":"The Gram stain differentiates bacteria based on differences in their:","options":["A) DNA content","B) Cell wall composition","C) Ribosome size","D) Capsule thickness"],"correct":1,"explanation":"The Gram stain works because of differences in cell wall structure. Gram-positive bacteria have a thick peptidoglycan layer that retains crystal violet-iodine complex after alcohol decolorization, appearing purple. Gram-negative bacteria have a thin peptidoglycan layer with an outer membrane; they lose the primary stain and take up the safranin counterstain, appearing pink/red."},
  {"question":"Which bacterial structure is responsible for resistance to phagocytosis?","options":["A) Flagella","B) Pili","C) Capsule","D) Spore"],"correct":2,"explanation":"The bacterial capsule (polysaccharide or polypeptide layer outside the cell wall) resists phagocytosis by preventing opsonization and inhibiting attachment to phagocytes. Encapsulated organisms like Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, and Neisseria meningitidis are more virulent. Antibodies against capsular antigens promote phagocytosis (opsonization)."},
  {"question":"Bacterial flagella are composed of the protein:","options":["A) Actin","B) Tubulin","C) Flagellin","D) Keratin"],"correct":2,"explanation":"Bacterial flagella are composed of the protein flagellin, encoded by the fliC gene. Flagella consist of three parts: the basal body (anchors to cell membrane), the hook (flexible joint), and the filament (the long helical structure). Flagellin is a potent PAMP recognized by TLR-5 of the innate immune system, triggering inflammatory responses."},
  {"question":"Pili (fimbriae) on bacteria primarily function in:","options":["A) Motility","B) Sporulation","C) Adhesion to host cells","D) Protein synthesis"],"correct":2,"explanation":"Pili (fimbriae) are thin protein appendages that mediate adhesion of bacteria to host cell receptors, which is the critical first step in infection. Type 1 pili of E. coli bind to mannose residues on uroepithelial cells. Sex pili (F pili) are specialized for bacterial conjugation and DNA transfer. Pili are important virulence factors and potential vaccine targets."},
  {"question":"Which of the following bacteria is Gram-positive?","options":["A) Escherichia coli","B) Pseudomonas aeruginosa","C) Staphylococcus aureus","D) Salmonella typhi"],"correct":2,"explanation":"Staphylococcus aureus is a Gram-positive coccus. It has a thick peptidoglycan cell wall that retains crystal violet after decolorization. The other options (E. coli, Pseudomonas, Salmonella) are all Gram-negative bacteria with thin peptidoglycan and an outer lipopolysaccharide membrane. Correct Gram stain interpretation is essential for guiding initial antibiotic therapy."},
  {"question":"Endospores are produced by which of the following organisms?","options":["A) Staphylococcus aureus","B) Bacillus anthracis","C) Mycobacterium tuberculosis","D) Streptococcus pneumoniae"],"correct":1,"explanation":"Endospores are produced by Gram-positive rods, primarily Bacillus spp. (aerobic) and Clostridium spp. (anaerobic). Bacillus anthracis produces central, oval spores. Spores are metabolically dormant, highly resistant to heat, desiccation, UV radiation, and disinfectants. They can survive for decades in soil. Autoclaving at 121°C for 15-20 minutes is required for their destruction."},
  {"question":"The cell wall component responsible for the toxic effects of Gram-negative bacteria is:","options":["A) Peptidoglycan","B) Lipopolysaccharide (LPS)","C) Teichoic acid","D) Porin proteins"],"correct":1,"explanation":"Lipopolysaccharide (LPS), also called endotoxin, is the major toxic component of the Gram-negative outer membrane. The lipid A portion of LPS triggers innate immune responses through TLR-4, releasing cytokines (TNF-α, IL-1, IL-6) that cause fever, hypotension, and septic shock. The O-antigen polysaccharide chain is used for serotyping. LPS is pyrogenic and a key virulence factor."},
  {"question":"Teichoic acids are found in the cell wall of:","options":["A) Gram-negative bacteria","B) Gram-positive bacteria","C) Mycobacteria","D) Mycoplasma"],"correct":1,"explanation":"Teichoic acids are anionic polymers of ribitol or glycerol phosphate found in the cell walls of Gram-positive bacteria. Wall teichoic acids are covalently linked to peptidoglycan; lipoteichoic acids are anchored in the cytoplasmic membrane. They contribute to the negative charge of the bacterial surface, play roles in cell division, and are important in adhesion to host tissues and as PAMPs recognized by TLR-2."},
  {"question":"Which staining technique is used for demonstrating bacterial capsules?","options":["A) Gram stain","B) Ziehl-Neelsen stain","C) Quellung reaction","D) Flagella stain"],"correct":2,"explanation":"The Quellung (capsule swelling) reaction demonstrates bacterial capsules. When encapsulated bacteria are mixed with specific anticapsular antibodies, the capsule appears to swell and become more refractile under the microscope. This is due to antibody binding to capsular antigens, increasing the refractive index of the capsule. It is particularly useful for typing Streptococcus pneumoniae serotypes."},
  {"question":"Bacterial cell size is typically measured in:","options":["A) Millimeters (mm)","B) Centimeters (cm)","C) Micrometers (μm)","D) Nanometers (nm)"],"correct":2,"explanation":"Bacteria are typically 0.5–5 micrometers (μm) in size. Most cocci are about 1 μm in diameter, while rods range from 2–10 μm. The resolution limit of the light microscope (0.2 μm) is sufficient to visualize bacteria. Viruses, at 20–300 nanometers, require electron microscopy. Understanding bacterial size is important for interpreting microscopy findings."},
  {"question":"The outer membrane of Gram-negative bacteria contains which channel-forming proteins?","options":["A) Porins","B) Integrins","C) Cadherins","D) Connexins"],"correct":0,"explanation":"Porins are beta-barrel transmembrane proteins in the outer membrane of Gram-negative bacteria that form water-filled channels allowing passive diffusion of small hydrophilic molecules (sugars, amino acids, ions). Examples include OmpC, OmpF in E. coli. Porin mutations reduce antibiotic penetration, contributing to resistance. Porins also serve as receptors for bacteriophages and colicins."},
  {"question":"Which organism is characteristically described as a 'seagull' or 'comma-shaped' organism?","options":["A) Vibrio cholerae","B) Treponema pallidum","C) Borrelia burgdorferi","D) Leptospira interrogans"],"correct":0,"explanation":"Vibrio cholerae is a curved, comma-shaped Gram-negative rod (vibrio morphology). It is highly motile with a single polar flagellum. On dark-field microscopy, it shows characteristic darting motility. The comma shape distinguishes it from straight rods. V. cholerae O1 and O139 cause epidemic cholera through the action of cholera toxin on intestinal epithelium."},
  {"question":"Mycoplasma is unique among bacteria because it:","options":["A) Has no ribosomes","B) Has no cell wall","C) Has no DNA","D) Has no cell membrane"],"correct":1,"explanation":"Mycoplasma lacks a cell wall, making it the smallest self-replicating organism. The absence of a cell wall means: (1) Mycoplasma cannot be visualized by Gram stain, (2) it is resistant to beta-lactam and glycopeptide antibiotics that target cell wall synthesis, (3) it is pleomorphic (variable shape), and (4) it requires cholesterol for cell membrane stability. Treatment uses macrolides or tetracyclines."},
  {"question":"The peptidoglycan (murein) layer of bacterial cell wall is composed of:","options":["A) N-acetylglucosamine and N-acetylmuramic acid","B) Glucose and fructose","C) Lipid A and polysaccharide","D) Diaminopimelic acid and lysine only"],"correct":0,"explanation":"Peptidoglycan consists of alternating N-acetylglucosamine (NAG) and N-acetylmuramic acid (NAM) sugar residues cross-linked by short peptide chains. The peptide chains in Gram-positive bacteria often contain L-lysine, while Gram-negative bacteria use diaminopimelic acid (DAP). Beta-lactam antibiotics and vancomycin inhibit peptidoglycan synthesis; lysozyme cleaves the glycosidic bond between NAG and NAM."},
  {"question":"Dark-field microscopy is the preferred method for visualizing:","options":["A) Staphylococcus aureus","B) Treponema pallidum","C) Mycobacterium tuberculosis","D) Bacillus anthracis"],"correct":1,"explanation":"Treponema pallidum (syphilis) is too thin (0.1–0.2 μm wide) to be visualized by conventional light microscopy or Gram stain. Dark-field microscopy uses oblique illumination to make the organisms appear bright against a dark background. T. pallidum shows characteristic corkscrew morphology and rotational motility. Dark-field microscopy of chancre fluid is the gold standard for primary syphilis diagnosis."},
  {"question":"Albert stain is used to demonstrate which characteristic structure of Corynebacterium diphtheriae?","options":["A) Spores","B) Metachromatic granules (volutin granules)","C) Capsule","D) Flagella"],"correct":1,"explanation":"Albert stain demonstrates metachromatic granules (volutin/Babes-Ernst granules) in Corynebacterium diphtheriae, which stain purple/dark blue against a green bacterial cytoplasm. These granules are polymetaphosphate energy storage bodies that exhibit metachromasia (staining a different color than the stain itself). They give C. diphtheriae its characteristic beaded appearance and are used in identification."},
  {"question":"Spirochetes are distinguished from other bacteria by their:","options":["A) Gram-positive cell wall","B) Endoflagella (axial filaments) enabling corkscrew motility","C) Absence of a cell membrane","D) Large cell size visible to naked eye"],"correct":1,"explanation":"Spirochetes are helically coiled bacteria that move by means of endoflagella (axial filaments) located in the periplasmic space between the outer membrane and peptidoglycan layer. The rotation of these flagella creates a corkscrew motion visible under dark-field microscopy. Major spirochetes of medical importance include Treponema pallidum (syphilis), Borrelia burgdorferi (Lyme disease), and Leptospira interrogans (leptospirosis)."},
  {"question":"Which of the following describes the arrangement of diplococci?","options":["A) Pairs of cocci","B) Chains of cocci","C) Clusters of cocci","D) Tetrads of cocci"],"correct":0,"explanation":"Diplococci are cocci arranged in pairs. Examples include Neisseria gonorrhoeae (kidney bean-shaped diplococci), Neisseria meningitidis, and Streptococcus pneumoniae (lancet-shaped diplococci). Chains of cocci are called streptococci; clusters are called staphylococci; groups of four are tetrads (Micrococcus). The arrangement pattern results from the plane of cell division and failure of cells to separate after division."},
  {"question":"The growth of bacteria in pairs, chains, or clusters depends on:","options":["A) The availability of nutrients","B) The plane of cell division and degree of separation after division","C) The temperature of incubation","D) The presence of capsules"],"correct":1,"explanation":"Bacterial arrangement depends on the plane(s) of cell division and whether cells separate after dividing. Division in one plane with separation gives diplococci; division in one plane without separation gives streptococci (chains). Division in two planes gives tetrads; division in three planes in random directions gives staphylococci (clusters). Division in three planes in regular directions gives sarcinae (packets of 8). This is genetically determined."},
  {"question":"Acid-fast bacteria like Mycobacterium retain carbol fuchsin after acid-alcohol decolorization because of:","options":["A) Thick peptidoglycan","B) High mycolic acid content in cell wall","C) Presence of endospores","D) Gram-positive cell wall structure"],"correct":1,"explanation":"Mycobacteria are acid-fast because their cell wall contains large amounts of mycolic acids (long-chain fatty acids with 60–90 carbon atoms) and arabinogalactan, creating a waxy, hydrophobic layer that resists decolorization with acid-alcohol after carbol fuchsin staining. This property makes mycobacteria resistant to many disinfectants and antibiotics. Gram stain is not useful for Mycobacteria as they stain poorly."},
  {"question":"Which structure allows bacteria to adhere to smooth surfaces and form biofilms?","options":["A) Flagella","B) Spores","C) Pili and glycocalyx","D) Ribosomes"],"correct":2,"explanation":"Pili (fimbriae) and the glycocalyx (polysaccharide capsule/slime layer) mediate bacterial adhesion to surfaces and contribute to biofilm formation. Biofilms are structured communities of bacteria encased in a self-produced extracellular polysaccharide matrix. Biofilms are important in chronic infections (endocarditis, UTI, cystic fibrosis), medical device-related infections, and are resistant to antibiotics and immune defenses."},
  {"question":"The Schaeffer-Fulton spore stain uses which primary dye?","options":["A) Crystal violet","B) Carbol fuchsin (malachite green for spores)","C) Methylene blue","D) Safranin"],"correct":1,"explanation":"The Schaeffer-Fulton spore stain uses malachite green as the primary stain (with heat to penetrate the spore coat) and safranin as the counterstain. Spores stain green while vegetative cells stain pink/red. This allows identification of spore position (central, subterminal, terminal) and shape (oval, spherical), which helps in species identification of Bacillus and Clostridium species."},
  {"question":"Which of the following is an example of a monotrichous organism?","options":["A) Escherichia coli (peritrichous)","B) Vibrio cholerae (single polar flagellum)","C) Salmonella typhi (peritrichous)","D) Pseudomonas aeruginosa (single polar flagellum)"],"correct":1,"explanation":"Monotrichous bacteria have a single flagellum at one pole. Vibrio cholerae has a single polar flagellum (monotrichous). Pseudomonas aeruginosa also has a single polar flagellum. Peritrichous organisms (E. coli, Salmonella) have flagella distributed over the entire surface. Lophotrichous organisms have multiple flagella at one pole; amphitrichous have flagella at both poles. Flagellar arrangement is taxonomically important."},
  {"question":"The L-forms of bacteria are characterized by:","options":["A) Loss of ribosomes","B) Absence or deficiency of cell wall","C) Loss of DNA","D) Absence of cell membrane"],"correct":1,"explanation":"L-forms (named after Lister Institute) are bacteria that have lost their cell wall, either spontaneously or due to exposure to cell wall-inhibiting agents (penicillin, lysozyme). They are osmotically fragile and pleomorphic. L-forms may cause persistent or relapsing infections because they are resistant to beta-lactam antibiotics. They can revert to normal forms if the inducing agent is removed."},
  {"question":"Which of the following stains is used to identify bacterial flagella under light microscopy?","options":["A) Gram stain","B) Leifson flagella stain","C) Albert stain","D) India ink preparation"],"correct":1,"explanation":"The Leifson flagella stain uses tannic acid mordant to coat flagella and increase their diameter enough to be visible under light microscopy (flagella are normally too thin at 0.01–0.02 μm). The mordant precipitates around the flagellum, and a dye (basic fuchsin or crystal violet) is then applied. Electron microscopy is more accurate for flagellar morphology. Flagellar arrangement is used in bacterial classification."},
  {"question":"Biofilm formation is most clinically relevant in infections involving:","options":["A) Acute pneumococcal pneumonia","B) Prosthetic heart valves and urinary catheters","C) Primary meningococcal meningitis","D) Uncomplicated urinary tract infections"],"correct":1,"explanation":"Biofilms are clinically significant in infections on indwelling medical devices such as prosthetic heart valves, urinary catheters, central venous catheters, and orthopedic implants. Biofilm bacteria are 100–1000 times more resistant to antibiotics than planktonic bacteria due to reduced drug penetration, altered metabolic states, and persister cells. Staphylococcus epidermidis and S. aureus are common biofilm-forming pathogens."},
  {"question":"The periplasmic space in Gram-negative bacteria is located between:","options":["A) Cell membrane and outer membrane","B) Cell membrane and cytoplasm","C) Outer membrane and capsule","D) Ribosomes and cell membrane"],"correct":0,"explanation":"The periplasmic space is the compartment between the cytoplasmic (inner) membrane and the outer membrane in Gram-negative bacteria. It contains the thin peptidoglycan layer, periplasmic proteins (enzymes like beta-lactamases, binding proteins for nutrients), and osmotically active molecules. Beta-lactamases secreted here can inactivate beta-lactam antibiotics before they reach their target (PBPs on the inner membrane)."},
  {"question":"Which of the following bacteria is characteristically described as 'Chinese letters' or 'cuneiform' arrangement?","options":["A) Staphylococcus aureus","B) Corynebacterium diphtheriae","C) Streptococcus pyogenes","D) Neisseria meningitidis"],"correct":1,"explanation":"Corynebacterium diphtheriae is characteristically described as having a 'Chinese letter' or 'cuneiform' arrangement due to its club-shaped (pleomorphic) rods that arrange in V, L, or palisade (picket fence) arrangements after snapping division. This appearance, along with metachromatic granules on Albert stain, is characteristic of C. diphtheriae on Gram stain of clinical specimens."},
  {"question":"Mycobacteria are classified as Gram-positive, Gram-negative, or:","options":["A) Gram-positive","B) Gram-negative","C) Gram-variable","D) Do not stain with Gram stain"],"correct":3,"explanation":"Mycobacteria do not stain reliably with the Gram stain due to their high mycolic acid content in the cell wall, which makes them hydrophobic and impermeable to the aqueous crystal violet and safranin dyes. They are technically Gram-positive in cell wall composition (no outer membrane) but are identified using the Ziehl-Neelsen (acid-fast) stain or Auramine-rhodamine fluorescent stain."},
  {"question":"The term 'coccobacilli' refers to bacteria that are:","options":["A) Round cocci arranged in pairs","B) Short oval rods intermediate between cocci and bacilli","C) Long curved rods","D) Spiral-shaped bacteria"],"correct":1,"explanation":"Coccobacilli are short, oval-shaped bacteria intermediate in morphology between cocci and bacilli. Examples include Haemophilus influenzae, Brucella, Bordetella pertussis, and Acinetobacter. The shape can cause confusion in Gram stain interpretation. Accurate morphological description helps in narrowing differential diagnosis and guiding laboratory identification of unknown isolates."},
  {"question":"Which of the following is the main function of bacterial ribosomes (70S)?","options":["A) DNA replication","B) Protein synthesis","C) Cell wall synthesis","D) Energy production"],"correct":1,"explanation":"Bacterial ribosomes (70S, composed of 30S and 50S subunits) are the site of protein synthesis. The 30S subunit binds mRNA and aminoacyl-tRNA, while the 50S subunit catalyzes peptide bond formation. Many antibiotics target bacterial ribosomes specifically: aminoglycosides and tetracyclines target 30S; macrolides, chloramphenicol, and linezolid target 50S. Eukaryotic ribosomes (80S) are not affected by these antibiotics."},
  {"question":"Protoplasts and spheroplasts differ in that:","options":["A) Protoplasts are from Gram-positive bacteria; spheroplasts from Gram-negative bacteria","B) Protoplasts are from Gram-negative bacteria; spheroplasts from Gram-positive bacteria","C) Protoplasts have an outer membrane; spheroplasts do not","D) There is no difference between them"],"correct":0,"explanation":"Protoplasts are formed from Gram-positive bacteria by complete removal of the cell wall with lysozyme; they have only the cytoplasmic membrane and are osmotically very fragile. Spheroplasts are formed from Gram-negative bacteria; they retain the outer membrane after partial cell wall removal, giving them a spherical shape but more osmotic stability. Both are used in genetic manipulation and study of membrane functions."},
  {"question":"The 'tumbling motility' seen in Listeria monocytogenes at 25°C is mediated by:","options":["A) Single polar flagellum","B) Peritrichous flagella","C) Endoflagella","D) No flagella — Listeria is non-motile"],"correct":1,"explanation":"Listeria monocytogenes is motile at 25°C (room temperature) due to peritrichous flagella, showing characteristic end-over-end 'tumbling' motility in wet preparations. At 37°C (body temperature), flagella are not expressed. Motility at 25°C is a useful diagnostic feature. At body temperature, Listeria uses actin-based intracellular motility (ActA protein rockets) to spread from cell to cell, evading extracellular immune defenses."},
  {"question":"Which bacterial shape is described as 'vibrio'?","options":["A) Straight rod","B) Comma-shaped or curved rod","C) Spherical","D) Helical/spiral"],"correct":1,"explanation":"Vibrio refers to a curved or comma-shaped rod (less than one complete spiral turn). Vibrio cholerae is the classic example. Campylobacter jejuni (S-shaped or gull-wing) is sometimes described as a vibrio. Bacteria with one complete turn are called spirilla; multiple turns define spirochetes. The shape is due to the arrangement of the cell wall and is a stable genetic characteristic used in classification."},
  {"question":"The cell membrane of bacteria differs from eukaryotic cell membranes in that it:","options":["A) Contains phospholipids","B) Lacks sterols (except Mycoplasma)","C) Has no protein components","D) Is not selectively permeable"],"correct":1,"explanation":"The bacterial cytoplasmic membrane lacks sterols (cholesterol or ergosterol), which are present in eukaryotic cell membranes and provide structural stability. The exception is Mycoplasma, which incorporates cholesterol from the host into its membrane. Antifungal drugs like amphotericin B target ergosterol in fungal membranes. Polymyxin antibiotics disrupt bacterial membranes by acting like detergents. The membrane functions in selective permeability, electron transport, and secretion."},
  {"question":"Plasmids in bacteria are:","options":["A) Segments of chromosomal DNA","B) Extra-chromosomal circular DNA molecules","C) RNA molecules in the cytoplasm","D) Membrane-associated proteins"],"correct":1,"explanation":"Plasmids are small, circular, double-stranded DNA molecules that replicate independently of the bacterial chromosome. They may carry genes for antibiotic resistance (R plasmids), virulence factors, metabolic functions, or bacteriocin production. Some plasmids (conjugative) can be transferred between bacteria by conjugation. Plasmids are exploited in molecular biology for cloning and genetic engineering. They are not essential for survival but confer selective advantages."},
  {"question":"The term 'pleomorphism' in bacteriology means:","options":["A) Bacteria that change their Gram staining","B) Variation in size and shape within a single bacterial species","C) Bacteria that form multiple spore types","D) Bacteria with multiple flagella types"],"correct":1,"explanation":"Pleomorphism refers to variability in the size and shape of bacteria within a single species or culture. It is characteristic of Corynebacterium (club-shaped, irregular), Mycobacterium (beaded rods), and Mycoplasma (extreme pleomorphism due to no cell wall). Pleomorphism can result from growth conditions, age of culture, antibiotic exposure, or is an inherent characteristic. It complicates microscopic identification."},
  {"question":"The India ink (nigrosin) preparation is used to demonstrate:","options":["A) Flagella","B) Spores","C) Bacterial capsules (negative staining)","D) Acid-fast properties"],"correct":2,"explanation":"India ink (nigrosin) is used for negative (background) staining to demonstrate bacterial capsules. The ink provides a dark background, and the capsule excludes the ink particles, appearing as a clear halo around the bacterial cell. This is particularly useful for Cryptococcus neoformans (fungus) in CSF. For bacteria, it demonstrates capsules of Klebsiella pneumoniae, Streptococcus pneumoniae, and others."},
  {"question":"Gram-negative bacteria that are coccoid in shape include:","options":["A) Staphylococcus and Streptococcus","B) Neisseria and Moraxella","C) Bacillus and Clostridium","D) Klebsiella and Proteus"],"correct":1,"explanation":"Gram-negative cocci of medical importance include Neisseria species (N. gonorrhoeae, N. meningitidis) and Moraxella catarrhalis (formerly Branhamella). Veillonella are anaerobic Gram-negative cocci. Staphylococcus and Streptococcus are Gram-positive cocci. Gram-negative cocci tend to be diplococci (kidney bean-shaped for Neisseria). They are oxidase-positive and fastidious in growth requirements."},
  {"question":"Bacterial endotoxin (LPS) differs from exotoxins in that endotoxin:","options":["A) Is a protein","B) Is heat labile","C) Is a lipopolysaccharide component of Gram-negative cell wall","D) Is neutralized by specific antitoxin"],"correct":2,"explanation":"Endotoxin (LPS) is a structural component of the Gram-negative outer membrane (lipopolysaccharide); it is not actively secreted. It is heat stable, has low antigenicity (cannot be converted to toxoid), acts non-specifically through TLR-4, and is not neutralized by specific antitoxin. Exotoxins are proteins actively secreted by bacteria, heat-labile, highly antigenic, and can be converted to toxoids for immunization (e.g., diphtheria, tetanus toxoids)."}
]
